---
title: "Math Monday 10/21"
date: 2024-10-21
draft: true
path: "math-monday-10-21"
---

We're going to be talking about $L$-functions. There are three things we care about with regards to $L$-functions:
- meromorphic continuation;
- functional equations;
- Euler products.

<h2>Meromorphic continuation</h2>

- $f: \mathbb{C} \to \mathbb{C}$ is holomorphic if it's complex differntiable.
- it's meromorphic if it's holomorphic except for some poles $z$, i.e. if the function $1/f$ is holomorphic & $0$ at $z.$

Example. Let
$$
f(z) = 1 + z + z^2 \ldots
$$
be defined for $|z|<1.$ We can define a meromorphic continuation $f(z) = 1/(1-z)$ where $f(z)$ is not well defined, and this is holomorphic everywhere except $z = 1.$

The Riemann zeta function is an $L$-function.
$$
\zeta(s) = 1 + \frac{1}{2^s} + \frac{1}{3^s} + \cdots.
$$
This converges for $\Re(s) > 1.$ This integral also has a meromorphic continuation. Note that the sum is also equal to 
$$
\zeta(s) = \frac{1}{\Gamma(s)} \int_0 ^\infty \frac{1}{e^t - 1} t^{s-1}\, dt
$$
where
$$
\Gamma(s) = \int_0^\infty e^{-t} t^{s-1} dt.
$$
Indeed, we can rewrite this like
$$
\begin{align*}
\int_0 ^\infty \frac{1}{e^t - 1} t^{s-1}\, dt &= \int_0 ^\infty (e^{-t} + e^{-2t} + \cdots) t^{s-1} dt \\\
&= \sum_{n \geq 1} \int_0^\infty e^{-nt} t^{s-1} \\\
&= \sum_{n \geq 1} \int_0^\infty e^{-nt} t^{s-1}
\end{align*}
$$

Mellin transform: if we have some $\phi: (0, \infty) \to \mathbb{C},$ smooth + decays rapidly at $\infty,$ then the Mellin transform is described as
$$
M(\phi, s) = \int_0^\infty \phi(t) t^{s-1}dt.
$$
You can take $\Gamma(s) = M(e^{-t}, s). Then,
$$
\zeta(s) = \frac{1}{\Gamma(s)} M (\frac{1}{e^t - 1}, s).
$$

If $\phi$ decays rapidly at $0,$ $M(\phi,s)$ always converges. When it doesn't, you have to be a little bit more careful.

Theorem: $M(\phi, s)$ has meromorphic continuation if $\phi$ has an asymptotic expansion of the form 
$$
\phi(t) = \sum_{n\geq 1} a_n t^{\alpha n}, \, t \to 0.
$$
Poles are at most $s = -\alpha, -\alpha_2, \ldots.$ 

Proof of this: 
$$
\int_0^1 t^{\alpha n} t^{s-1} dt = \frac{st\alpha_n} t^{\alpha n + s} | _0 ^1 = \frac{1}{st\alpha_n}.
$$

From this theorem, we can see that the poles of the $\zeta$ function are at $1, 0, -1, -2, \ldots$, and the poles of the gamma function are at the negative integers $0, -1, -2, \ldots,$ then the *poles cancel out for some weird reason*, then the only pole is at $s=1.$ 

<h2>Functional Equation</h2>

Define $\Lambda(s) = \pi^{-s/2}\Gamma(s/2) \zeta(s).$ Then $\Lambda(s) = \Lambda(1-s).$

This is the "completed Riemann zeta function."

We're going to define a generalization over Dirichlet characters mod $N$. $\chi: \mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{C}^x,$ where $\chi(ab) = \chi(a)\chi(b)$ and $\chi(a) \neq 0$ iff $\gcd(a, N) = 1,$ and $\chi(a+n) = \chi(a).$ A Dirichlet series is 
$$
L(s, \chi) = \sum_{n \geq 1} \frac{\chi(n)}{n^s}.$
$$
for $\Re(s) > 1.$

Meromorphic continuation: Assume $\phi$ is primitive (does not come from some Dirichlet character of mod $N_1 | N.$) $\chi(-1) = (-1)^\eta,$ $\eta \in \{0,1\}.$ Gauss sum is
$$
\sum_{a = 1}^{N} \chi(a) e^{2\pi i a/ N}.
$$

Theta function $t>0$

$$\Theta_\chi(t) = \frac1{2} \sum_{n = - \infty}^\infty n^\eta \chi(n) e^{-\pi n^2 t}$$

Thm. Let $\Lambda(s,\chi) = \pi^{-(s+\eta)/2}\Gamma((s+\eta)/2) L(s\chi).$ Then, $\Lambda(s,\chi) = M(\Theta_\chi, (s+\eta)/2).$

Functional equation:
$$
$\Lambda(s,\chi) = (-i)^\eta \tau(\chi)N^{-s}\Lambda(1-s, \vbar{\chi}).
$$
This comes from a functional equation relating $\theta_\chi(t)$ and $\theta_\vbar{\chi}(t)$ and $\theta_\vbar{\chi} \left( \frac1{N^2t}\right).$

<h2>Modular Form</h3>

Let $\mathcal{H} = \{x + 2y | y > 0\}.$ Let $k \geq 0$ be an even integer. A modular form of weight $k$ (for $SL_2(\mathbb{Z})$) is a function $f: \mathcal{H} \to \mathbb{C}$

(1) $f((az+b)/(cz+d)) = (cz+d)^kf(z)
(2) f holomorphic, and holomorphic at $\infty.$ 

it's holomorphic at $\infty,$ so it can be written as a fourier series. this requires holomorphicity at infinity. Holomorphicity at infinity can also be defined as a growth condition. 

we say $f$ is a cusp for if $a_0 = 0.$ Suppose $k \geq 4.$ 

consider the eisenstein series. 

meromorphic continuation: suppose for simplicity that $L$ is a cusp form. then $L(s,f)$ is the Mellin transform $M(f(it),s).$

