---
title: "Crash Course in Metric Spaces, Topology and A Little Measure Theory"
date: 2024-10-20
path: "rieffel-mt1"
draft: true
---

I have a midterm tomorrow, so we're going to study for it!

Outline:
- Metric Spaces
    - Metrics
    - Structure-Preserving Maps
    - Metric Completions
- Topology
    - Metric Topologies, Open & Closed Sets, Bases & Sub-Bases, Induced Topologies, Closures, The Product Topology, Quotient Spaces, Homeomorphism, Group Actions
    - Normal Spaces, Urysohn's Lemma, Bounded Functions, Tietze Extension Theorem
    - Compactness, Hausdorff Spaces, Tychonoff's Theorem, Totally Bounded Spaces, Nets, Arzela-Ascoli Theorem, Locally Compact Spaces, Supports
- Measure Theory
    - Evaluation Maps, Gelfand-Naimark Theorem, Finitely Additive Measures, Measures & Premeasures, Countable Subadditivity, Outer Measures, Completeness

<h2>Metric Spaces</h2>

<h3>Metrics</h3>

A *metric* $d$ on a set $X$ is symmetric, non-negative, satisfies the triangle inequality, and is such that $d(x,y) = 0$ if and only if $x = y$.

A semi-metric relaxes the condition that $d(x,y) = 0$ if and only if $x = y$. An extended metric maps to $\mathbb{R}\_{\geq 0}^\{\infty\}$ instead of $\mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}$ (e.g. includes $\infty$ as a possible value).

A *norm* on a vector space $V$ is a function $\||\cdot\||: V \to \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}$ such that $\||x\|| = 0$ if and only if $x = 0$, $\||\lambda x\|| = |\lambda| \||x\||$ for all $\lambda \in \mathbb{R}$ and $x \in V$, and the triangle inequality holds. A seminorm relaxes the condition that $\||x\|| = 0$ if and only if $x = 0$.

Given a semi-norm $\||\cdot\||$, the function $d(x,y) = \||x - y\||$ is a semi-metric. Similarly for norms and metrics.

Let $V := C([0,1])$ be the vector space of continuous functions on the unit interval. Then,
$$
||f||_p = \left( \int_0^1 |f(x)|^p dx \right)^{1/p}
$$
defines a norm on $V$. We call this the $L^p$ norm.[^1]

<h3>Structure-Preserving Maps</h3>

*Isometries* are distance-preserving maps between metric spaces. That is, given two metric spaces $(X, d_X)$ and $(Y, d_Y)$, an isometry is a function $f: X \to Y$ such that $$d_Y(f(x), f(x')) = d_X(x,x')$$ for all $x,x' \in X$. Compositions of isometries are isometries, all isometries are injective, and surjective isometries are bijective. 

*Lipschitz continuity* is a way to formalize a weakening of the notion of isometry. A function $f: (X, d_X) \to (Y, d_Y)$ is Lipschitz continuous if there exists a constant $C \geq 0$ such that $$d_Y(f(x), f(x')) \leq C d_X(x,x')$$ for all $x,x' \in X$. The smallest such constant is called the Lipschitz constant, which always exists and is unique. Lipschitz continuity is preserved under composition.[^2]

*Uniform continuity* is a weakening of Lipschitz continuity. Given metric spaces $(X, d_X)$ and $(Y, d_Y)$, a function $f: X \to Y$ is uniformly continuous if and only if for all $\epsilon > 0$ there exists some $\delta > 0$ such that $$d_X(x,x') < \delta \implies d_Y(f(x), f(x')) < \epsilon$$ for all $x,x' \in X$. Uniform continuity is preserved under composition.[^3]

*Continuity* on metric spaces is defined as follows. Given metric spaces $(X, d_X)$ and $(Y, d_Y),$ a function $f: X \to Y$ is continuous at a point $x \in X$ if for all $\epsilon > 0$ there exists some $\delta > 0$ such that $$d_X(x,x') < \delta \implies d_Y(f(x), f(x')) < \epsilon$$ for all $x' \in X$. $f$ is continuous if and only if it is continuous at all $x \in X$. Continuity is preserved under composition.

<h3>Metric Completions</h3>

*Convergence:* Fix a semi-metric $d$ on a set $X$. A sequence of points $\\{x_n\\}_{n\in \mathbb{N}} \subseteq X$ converges to $x \in X$ if and only if, for any $\epsilon > 0,$ we can find $N>0$ such that
$$
n>N \implies d(x_n, x) < \epsilon.
$$ Continuous functions preserve convergence.

*Cauchy Sequences:* Fix a semi-metric $d$ on a set $X$. A sequence of points $\\{x_n\\}_{n\in \mathbb{N}} \subseteq X$ is a Cauchy sequence if and only if, for any $\epsilon > 0,$ we can find $N>0$ such that
$$
m,n>N \implies d(x_m, x_n) < \epsilon.
$$ Uniformly continuous functions preserve Cauchy sequences. All convergent sequences are Cauchy.

*Completeness:* A metric space $(X,d)$ is complete if and only if every Cauchy sequence in $X$ converges to a point in $X$.

Any metric space $(X,d)$ has a completion. Any two completions of the same metric space are isometric, so completions are unique up to isometry.

<h2>Topology</h2>



- product topology: induced by the canonical projection mappings X x X -> X etc., and the minimal topology which makes these continuous. e.g U x U

[^1]: These intervals are finite because $[0,1]$ is compact, which forces $f$ to achieve a finite maximum on $[0,1]$. (All compact sets of metric spaces are closed and bounded).

[^2]: However, bijective Lipschitz continuous functions need not have a Lipschitz continuous inverse. We define Lipschitz isomorphisms to be Lipschitz continuous functions with Lipschitz continuous inverses.

[^3]: Uniform continuity implies continuity, but not vice versa. The $\delta$ in the definition of uniform continuity is a "global" $\delta$ that works for all $x,x' \in X$, whereas the $\delta$ in the definition of continuity is allowed to depend on $x$.


