---
title: 'Strategic Thinking'
date: '2024-10-28'
draft: true
---

Notes on a mini-course taught by Vince Crawford at Berkeley.

- the European Research Council requires all materials that are downstream of their funding to have their logo??

broadly an attempt at approaching game theory from a nonequilibrium point of view?

<h1>Theory and Evidence - Monday</h1>

Nash equilibrium is a concept that is a complete theory of strategic thinking. Why would you need alternatives? Any model of strategic thinking should have the same completeness properties, but maybe you can add empirical parameters. von Neumann came out against empirical parameters, but it's naive to think that you can get a behavioral game theory by measuring something about people's behavior. 

"How do people think?"

nash lets you calculate eq w/o knowing where it comes from

but wrt human cognition you want a "human expectations equilibrium", what you're rationally expecting is other people's behavior instead of utility functions or smt

rational expectations >> rationality of individual decisions

thought you need to have rational expectations abt decisions bc otherwise game theory has weak predictions. so you need more than individual rationality. but equilibrium is too strong to be behaviorally plausible, so you want to be able to weaken the rational expectations notion while preserving rationality at the individual level. goldilocks between equilibrium and individual rationality

can do better than equilibrium empirically. can do better than a rational expectation notion

- how can any model out-predict rational-expectation notions?
- if they exist, how can you identify them within the set of logically possible nonequilibrium models?

equilibrium has two main justifications:
- in learning models, decisions often converge (meta-policies converge when you play the same game with different partners)
- in thinking models, rational players predict others decisions in their initial responses to games played without close precedents epistemically (brandenburger 1992)

thinking justifications much more fragile than learning justifications, bc beliefs are hard to get right in complete nuance. fixed-point reasoning is not the thing that in practice people do

so generally, people overstate the justifications for equilibrium, because either the equilibrium predictions are correct on average or you'd turn into sociologists

most of the most interesting applications of game theory to microeconomics are to people playing new games for the first time. e.g. FTC spectrum auctions. the auction designers chickened out from using an established result from auction theory because there's no way that the parties would go to an equilibrium. renting an apartment in Boston =/= renting an apartment in Berkeley.

two ways of thinking abt equilibrium: rational expectations and minimax. 2nd can do w/decision theories

common models of strategic thinking:
- normal form games w/symmetric information, instead of extensive form games (he's willing to give reading sugge- normal form games w/symmetric information, instead of extensive form games (he's willing to give reading suggestions), and no learning
stions), and no learning
- structure of the game is common knowledge


impossibility result of global equilibria-like concept like nash for agents that do gradient descent or something? given loss landscape?

something interesting in game theory tells you something about pure coordination games & zero-sum games at the same time! philosophers only care about the former, which is why their game theory sucks

rule decision can be thought of as a sum of a mean decision + mean-zero error term. e.g., what part of the distribution generated by QRE is intentional and what is a mistake?. rules are self-informed if a player can identitfy its mean decisions using only information available to the player her or himself

strictly dominant games imply that beliefs about other players are the same, otherwise you can construct k-rationality for anything

QRE converges to equilibrium when error approaches inf, and converges to 0 when QRE converges to independent uniform randomization

noisy decisions + equilibrum = QRE

but QRE requires fixed-point reasoning in high-dimensional setting

haile et al. 

QRE is not self-informed

cognitive hierarchy models

FT experiment: spectrograph peak-like things









